the truce between Hamas and Israel ended
after seven days now in that time Hamas
and other militants in Gaza released
more than 100 hostages mostly Israelis
in return for the release of more than
240 Palestinian prisoners from Israeli
jails extensions of the truths were
negotiated with International help first
and foremost from a tiny Arab Emirate
whose unique influence over Hamas has
attracted International
attention
citizens of Israel break into cheers as
a convoy brings a 79-year-old hostage
home Joy also in the West Bank as
Palestinians welcome women and children
who were released from an Israeli
jail to get to this point required a
flurry of diplomatic activity involving
three key International
Players Number One Qatar
the country's leadership has direct
contact with Hamas since 2012 it's
hosted an overseas office for them Hamas
Chief isma hania and several other Top
members live in the Gulf Emirate and
Qatar has used this fact to exert
influence over the EU and US designated
terrorist
organization well we in Qatar uh have a
unique uh position that a lot of
countries around the world don't have uh
since the United requested that we open
this Channel with Hamas we have a
working relationship with them and we
are hopeful that through the abilities
that we have that we can do things that
others can do around the region and to
be fully honest we have been attacked
for being able to speak to Hamas being
able to speak to Iran being able to
speak to the Taliban being able to speak
to uh to Russia at at times but somebody
has to make these difficult discussions
somebody has to be able to say I'm going
to cross the line and make the
discussions that will bring about peace
peace doesn't happen unless there is
dialogue peace didn't happen but a paus
and fighting did also through dialogue
with Israel a country with which DOA has
no official diplomatic
relations behind closed doors qatar's
prime minister has hosted the chiefs of
both us and Israeli intelligence
agencies and last weekend a jet carrying
Qatari officials made its way to Israel
an historic first and extraordinary
moment for the two
countries the talks in Israel are said
to have been instrumental in Saving the
original truce and extending
it mediator number two the United
States Israel's most important Ally has
facilitated dialogue with Middle Eastern
mediators and has been pushing hard for
further extension to the
ceasefire on Thursday morning the US
Secretary of State touched down in Tel
Aviv for the fourth time since the
conflict
escalated his stated goal a longer term
solution for Israel and
Gaza this process is producing results
it's important and we hope that it can
continue the weight of Washington's
influence has been evident from the
start the first two hostages who were
released long before the hostages for
prisoner steel took effect were US
citizens but blinken's latest trip
wasn't enough to prevent a resumption of
fighting mediator number three
Egypt the country has opened its border
with Gaza to receive hostages released
by Hamas and allow trucks to deliver
humanitarian Aid to Gaza as part of the
truce in front of the cameras and behind
closed doors Egypt has also been
involved in diplomatic
negotiations analysts say that Egypt's
influence on the Israeli Palestinian
issue isn't what it once was but its
interest in ending the fighting in Gaza
remains Cairo doesn't want to take in
the hundreds of thousands of people the
war has
dis for more I'm now joined by Hans
yakob Schindler he's a former German
Diplomat and a Middle East expert he's
currently a senior director at the
counter extremism project Mr Chandler
it's good to have you here in the studio
with us tell us more about the
communication channels between Israel
and Hamas in these negotiations nothing
is official here right good evening
thanks for having me no there is not
direct contact so this goes via Qatar of
course we've seen Israeli officials
including high ranking intelligence
officials traveling from and to Doha um
but really Gat is here they go in
between between Israel and Hamas and and
so who's talking to whom then Gat talks
to Hamas Egypt parallel and not in Doha
also talks to Hamas how difficult is
communication between Israel and Hamas
with with all of these negotiators
involved I mean do you have almost too
many people whispering in in the
background well this is the same
challenge you have always when you have
indirect negotiations right you need to
be sure that your
intermediator is a absolutely
trustworthy and on the Qatari side I
would say there is a lack of that one uh
whether you actually get told the truth
of what the other side wants and also
you need to make understand you make to
make sure that the other your
intermediary understands what you want
the other side to understand and vice
versa so it's it's more complex but as
as Israel how could they talk directly
to Hamas unless it's on a very
operational very direct uh intelligence
level one very important Middle East
player with a lot of influence on Hamas
is is missing it seems and and I'm
talking about Iran why is that Iran
really is taking trying to take
advantage of this situation right you've
seen what hisbah does in the north but
it just does enough to keep Israel busy
but is Iran who could with one word set
hisa loose on Israel because hisbah is
beholden to Iran is uh essentially
preserving its asset on the other hand
the huthis in Yemen also a proxy of uh
uh Iran is uh also
doing the little that is possible to
keep everyone busy so Iran is trying to
position itself to get maximum benefit
out of this particular situation when we
talk about proxies I mean how should we
understand that does Hamas um do they
look to tyon for maybe deao permission
to do things for example or or is the
connection not quite that stringent I
mean if you look at what happens on the
7th of October it really has the
handwriting of Iran right what Hamas did
until this pogrom like attack was very
different methodologically as far as the
terrorist attack is concerned it was
smaller scale Terror attacks suicide
bombings but not a concerned multi-hour
multi-day military style terror attack
that killed everyone that was inside so
that is really the classic tactics that
Iran has taught the militias in Iraq
that has taught the isbah how he's
operating in Syria so
absolutely Hamas is beholden to Iran not
only for the supply of weapons and and
ammunition but also for money and and
what is going on inside Gaza I mean
Hamas is not the only player I'm
thinking of Islamic Jihad for example um
is Hamas does it have to make sure that
all of these players are on the same
page I think there's two levels here
right so if you're talking about who
holds more hostages and how can you know
the next level of the negotiations uh be
achieved and how could that go yes then
Hamas has competitors in an inverted
comma chiefly the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad who is a much smaller self
structured terrorist organization but
who has no political sway in Gaza of any
significant size and then there are some
of these quasi criminal groups that also
hold hostages but when it comes to
military decision making in Gaza there
really is only Hamas the the first deal
between Israel and Hamas is is now his
history fighting has resumed the US
they've made it very clear that they
expect Israel to protect Ordinary People
in Gaza more than than we've seen in the
past I mean that pressure is definitely
stronger than before how much leverage
does Washington have right now uh
Washington I'm pretty sure is the only
one who has actual leverage over Israel
and you've seen um a few more additional
attempts by Israel to demonstrate that
it's trying to uh protect civilians the
IDF the Israeli military released a map
in which the entire Gaza Strip is
divided into zones and they will
announce the number of the Zone where
the attack happens unusual for military
to tell his adversaries publicly where
they're going to attack next the price
uh that they're willing to pay in order
to make sure that the little as little
as possible civilians going to be
affected by these attacks of course that
also means Hamas Fighters are not going
to be necessarily in these areas anymore
let me ask to look into your crystal
ball how long do you think that um that
the fighting will continue until we have
another ceasefire another agreement in
place that is really hard to tell it was
very clear that this was just phase one
I always said this is the confidence
building phase can you actually do a
deal and operationalize a deal both
sides have kept their word until the
very end then Hamas played around with a
number of hostages went down it had a
terror attack in Jerusalem now
unfortunately Hamas had to end this
because Hamas wants more from Israel
than just three Palestinians per
prisoner final question for you who is
in a stronger position now compared to
when the the ceasefire started Israel or
heras it's really hard to tell that I
don't think the relative differences
have uh really militarily shifted to a
great deal Israel is in a very good
position to fully control the north of
Gaza soon but Hamas as we have seen the
last couple of hours is still able to
hit back Mr Shaner as as always good to
have you here in the studio we
appreciate your analysis thank you thank
you so
much gash and Basin is an Israeli Peace
activist and Middle East analyst and he
helped negotiate the release of Israeli
soldier gilad Shalit in 2011 and he
joins us now from Jerusalem now the
fighting unfortunately has resumed what
does that mean for the people still
being held hostage in Gaza and their
chances of being
released
it certainly makes it much more
difficult to
negotiate people being bombed in Gaza
and Hamas is on the Run Israel is after
the Hamas leadership Israel is also
certainly uh beginning search and rescue
operations to find the hostages being
held probably underground in Gaza in the
south of Gaza it it doesn't farewell for
the hostages that more negotiations and
more ceasefires are not active right now
to we are having a bit of trouble with
the audio line there let me ask my next
next question uh do negotiations even
continue under these
circumstances there are negotiations
that are continuing this is what we've
been told they are taking place in katar
and in Egypt they're at a slower Pace as
the fighting has resumed
and I guess everyone's trying to see
what will happen now what will hamas's
reaction be to the renewed fighting the
deal ended because Hamas stopped
providing Israel with a list of hostages
it was ready to release the fighting
could have been postponed the deal could
have continued more hostages could have
been released and more Palestinian
prisoners could have been released but
this was a choice of Hamas not to
continue with the deal and they are
suffering the now with a majority of the
elderly women mothers and children among
the Israeli hostages released mostly men
and soldiers are now left in Gaza uh
does that set the bar for potential
further agreements even
higher there are still 17 women in
children left amongst the Israeli
hostages certainly when we're down to
young men who Hamas considers Soldiers
the price will be much much different
than it was until now which was three
prisoners for every hostage how M has
already said that their goal is to empty
the Israeli prisons from Palestinian
Prisoners the latest count I've heard is
that there are
7,600 who were serving life sentences
for
murder who were captured in Israel on
October 7th it will be a very difficult
if not impossible negotiation to conduct
with hamas's demands being like that
Israel is very unlikely to agree to them
although I imagine that Israel will want
to pursue the negotiations while the
military actions and search and rescue
operations are
on Gan Basin there an Israeli Peace
activist and Middle East analyst thank
you very
much